Prometheus - Case Study (#16)
NoroffFEU/development-platforms: prometheus_toolkit.md

---
title: Prometheus Monitoring and Alerting
keywords: development platforms, example project, category name
tags: Development Platforms, Example Project, Category Name
sidebar: development-platforms
permalink: development-platforms/example-product.html
folder: development-platforms
---

## Introduction
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/89133440/217799993-db6dc66a-07c9-4ed9-bd3e-bd1500737fb8.png)

> Prometheus is an Open-Source systems monitoring and alerting toolkit that collects and stores it's numeric measurements as a time series data, information is stored with the timestamp at which it was recorded, alongside optional key-value paris called labels. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prometheus is an Open-Source systems monitoring and alerting toolkit that collects and stores it's numerical measurements as time series data. Information is stored with the timestamp at which it was recorded, alongside optional key-value pairs called labels. 
```

By the use of a multi-dimensional data model, data can be sliced and diced at will, along dimensions like instance, service, endpoint, and method.

> It is based on a principal of Operational simplicity, so that you can spin up a monitoring server where and when you want, even as a local server at home on your desktop computer. This without setting up a distributed storage backend or reconfiguring the world. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is based on a principal of `Operational Simplicity`, so that you can spin up a monitoring server where and when you want, even as a local server at home on your desktop computer. This without setting up a distributed storage backend or reconfiguring the world. 
```

> #### What is and why would i might want systems monitoring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### What is Prometheus?
```

> It is a tool for Executive management, PO's and clients to have a singel view of project schedules, health, risks, progress and documents. Look at it from an financial aspect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is a tool for Executive management, PO's and clients to have a single view of project schedules, health, risks, progress and documents. Look at it from a financial aspect
```

Is the last sentence unfinished?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/89133440/217797879-a9a03c77-ded7-47f3-8654-49afd4dab336.png)

## Brief History

> Prometheus is an open-source project built at [SoundCloud](https://soundcloud.com/discover). Since it's creation in 2012, there has been alot of updates and improvement on the system. It's now a standalone open-source project and maintained independently of any company. 

Reviewer: What about the history of monitoring/logging in general? What came before Prometheus and what problem did it solve?

Author: added more to the history

Prometheus joined the [Cloud Native Computing Foundation](https://www.cncf.io/) in 2016 as the second hosted project, after [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/).

## Features

* A multi-dimensional [data model](https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/data_model/)
* PromQL, a [flexible query language](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/)

> * no reliance on distributed storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* No reliance on distributed storage
```
For consistency

## Weaknesses

When it comes to using Prometheus for in depth event logging you are better with using InfluxDB. There is several other systems that you would have a better use of when it comes to more specified tasks and processes.
ie. 
* Sensus is better for collecting and processing hybrid observability data(this includes metrics and/or events)
* Graphite is better when you need/want a clustered solution that can hold historical data long term.

Prometheus could be a little more userfriendly with the UI then it is. But once you get the hang of it, it's pretty easy. Learning PromQL can be tedious to do as well. This is Prometheus own query language that can be complex. 

## Comparison

Compared to [InfluxDB](https://www.influxdata.com/), Prometheus is a better choice if you are primarily doing metrics, it also has a more powerfull query language, alerting and notification functionality then InfluxDB has. Both of the systems has their strengths and weaknesses, where one is better then the other. 

With Prometheus you get servers that are run independently of each other and only rely on their local storage for their core functionality: scraping, rule processing and alerting.

> The comercial InfluxDB offering is, by design, a distributed storage cluster with storage and queries being handled by many nodes at once. With that it means that the commercial version of InfluxDB will scale horizontally easier then Prometheus, but at the same time you need to manage higher complexity of a distributed storage systems strait of from the start. Prometheus is easier to setup and run. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The commercial InfluxDB offering is, by design, a distributed storage cluster with storage and queries being handled by many nodes at once. With that, it means that the commercial version of InfluxDB will scale horizontally easier than Prometheus, but at the same time, you need to manage the higher complexity of distributed storage systems straight off from the start. Prometheus is easier to setup and run. 
```

There is an open source version of InfluxDB that is similar to Prometheus, but not completly the same when it comes to the architecture of the system.

Both systems has a data model that has key-value pairs as labels, that is called tags. They both use support float64 data types but Prometheus offers this with limited support for strings and millisecond resolution timestamps, where InfluxDB offers has full support for it, along side of int64, and bool as well.

If you primarily doing event logging then InfluxDB is more suitable for this type of monitoring.

## Summary

> Prometheus is a great tool for systems monitoring and alerting, you can slice and dice the multi-dimensional data at will. Easier overview of samples that is stored. 

Reviewer: I think this is a repeat of the introduction

Author: changed up the summary so that it is not a direct repeat of the introduction
